BASIC NETWORK SNIFFER REPORT
1. Introduction In today's digital world, network security plays a crucial role in protecting data from unauthorized access and cyber threats. One of the fundamental techniques used in cybersecurity is network sniffing, which involves capturing and analyzing network traffic to monitor data flow and detect potential vulnerabilities.
A network sniffer is a tool that listens to network traffic and collects data packets for analysis. Such tools are widely used by network administrators, cybersecurity professionals, and ethical hackers to diagnose network issues, detect malicious activities, and enhance security.
Types of Network Sniffing
Network sniffing can be categorized into two main types:
•	Passive Sniffing: The sniffer operates in a non-intrusive mode, capturing packets without interfering with network traffic. It is commonly used in wired networks.
•	Active Sniffing: The sniffer actively injects packets into the network to manipulate traffic flow. This technique is often used in switched network environments.
Common Network Sniffing Tools
Several tools are available for network sniffing, including:
•	Wireshark: A widely used packet analyzer with a graphical interface for deep packet inspection.
•	tcpdump: A command-line tool used for capturing and analyzing packets in real time.
•	Ettercap: A tool designed for network sniffing and man-in-the-middle attacks.
This report provides an overview of developing a basic network sniffer using Python and the Scapy library. The project aims to help understand how data packets travel through a network, their structure, and how they can be analyzed.
2. Tools and Technologies Used
•	Python: A versatile programming language used for scripting and automation.
•	Scapy Library: A powerful Python library for network packet manipulation.
•	Socket Module: A fundamental module in Python used for network communication.
3. Implementation and Code Explanation To create a basic network sniffer, we utilize the Scapy library. Below is the Python code for capturing network packets:
from scapy.all import sniff

def packet_callback(packet):
    if packet.haslayer("IP"):
        src_ip = packet["IP"].src  # Source IP Address
        dst_ip = packet["IP"].dst  # Destination IP Address
        protocol = packet.proto    # Protocol Type (TCP, UDP, etc.)
        print(f"Packet: {src_ip} \u2192 {dst_ip} | Protocol: {protocol}")

sniff(prn=packet_callback, count=10)  # Capture 10 packets
Execution Steps
1.	Install Scapy using:
2.	pip install scapy
3.	Run the script with administrator privileges:
4.	sudo python script.py  # On Linux/Mac
5.	python script.py       # On Windows (Run as Admin)
6.	The script captures and displays details of 10 packets.
Code Explanation
•	The sniff() function captures network packets and processes them using the packet_callback function.
•	The packet_callback() function extracts the source IP, destination IP, and protocol type from each captured packet.
•	The program prints the details of each packet to the console.
4. Results and Observations After running the script, the captured packets reveal details such as source and destination IP addresses, along with the network protocol used. The output example:
Packet: 192.168.1.10 → 192.168.1.1 | Protocol: 6 (TCP)
Packet: 192.168.1.5 → 8.8.8.8 | Protocol: 17 (UDP)
Graphical Representation of Network Traffic
A visual representation of network packet transmission can be useful for analysis. Below is an example diagram illustrating how a sniffer captures packets in a network:
+------------+        +------------+        +------------+
|   Sender   | -----> |   Sniffer  | -----> |  Receiver  |
+------------+        +------------+        +------------+
The sniffer captures packets traveling between the sender and receiver, providing insights into network communication.
5. Conclusion and Future Enhancements This project successfully demonstrates how to build a basic network sniffer using Python. It provides valuable insights into how network packets are transmitted and analyzed, which is essential for network security professionals. By implementing a simple packet-capturing mechanism, we can monitor traffic flow and detect potential security threats.
Future Enhancements
To improve the functionality of this network sniffer, the following features can be added:
•	Packet Filtering: Implementing filters to capture only specific types of packets (e.g., HTTP, DNS, or ICMP traffic).
•	Data Logging: Storing packet details in a structured file format (CSV, JSON, or database) for further analysis.
•	Real-Time Analysis: Integrating live analysis to detect potential threats in real time.
•	Graphical User Interface (GUI): Adding a visual representation of network traffic for easier monitoring.
Understanding how network sniffers work is crucial for both security experts and ethical hackers, as it helps in diagnosing network issues and improving cybersecurity measures. By expanding the capabilities of this project, it can become a more effective tool for network monitoring and security analysis.




Phishing Awareness Training Report
1. Introduction
The digital age has seen cyber attacks increase in sophistication, and one of the most prevalent attack techniques is phishing. Phishing refers to the employment of misleading strategies by attackers to trick individuals into divulging sensitive data such as usernames, passwords, credit card details, or personal data. Phishing attacks typically occur via email, phone calls, or fake websites, which are difficult to detect without adequate awareness.
Phishing awareness training is important to avoid such attacks. It is designed to bring awareness about the threat of phishing and its detection, as well as how to avoid it. This report discusses different kinds of phishing attacks, phishing attempt detection, and why phishing awareness training is needed for both individual and organizational security.

2. Types of Phishing Attacks
Phishing attacks can come in various forms and levels of sophistication. Some of the most common types are detailed below:
Email Phishing: This is the most common type of phishing, where attackers send spoofed emails that appear to be from reliable sources. These emails typically contain malicious links or attachments that are designed to steal confidential information.
Spear Phishing: Spear phishing is highly specific compared to normal phishing. The attackers study a particular individual or business to craft custom emails, which sound more legitimate and hard to detect.
Whaling: Whaling is an advanced spear phishing attack that focuses on top-level executives, such as CEOs or CFOs. The goal is to extract confidential company data or authorize suspicious transactions.
Vishing (Voice Phishing): Vishing is a type of phishing that is conducted over phone calls. Attackers can impersonate legitimate entities, such as banks or government agencies, to trick victims into revealing personal or financial information.
Smishing (SMS Phishing): Smishing is conducted via SMS. Attackers send spoofed SMS with malicious URLs or phone numbers to trick the victim into divulging sensitive information.

3. Phishing Attack Techniques
Phishing attacks employ numerous techniques to trick individuals into becoming victims of the scam. Some of the most common are:
Social Engineering: The attackers psychologically manipulate individuals into performing something, such as clicking on malicious links or opening infected attachments. This is generally achieved by exploiting trust or a sense of urgency.
Fake Websites and URLs: The most effective phishing attack is executed by establishing fake websites that are similar to original ones. The attackers use these spoofed websites to capture login information and other sensitive information.
Delivery of Malware: Phishing emails or messages may contain attachments or URLs that, when opened, download malicious code onto the victim's device. Malware can steal data, compromise security, or even take control of the system.



4. Detecting Phishing Attempts
It is essential to detect phishing attempts in order not to become a victim of phishing attacks. Some of the major signs to check for are:
Suspicious Email Addresses: Phishing emails usually arrive from email addresses that closely resemble genuine ones but have minute differences, such as additional characters or misspelled domain names.
Unusual Requests: Phishing messages may ask for sensitive information such as passwords, personal identification numbers (PINs), or credit card details. Be wary when emails or messages ask for this kind of information in a hurry.
Grammar and Spelling Errors: Professional standards are usually upheld by authentic companies while communicating. Phishing messages may be riddled with spelling mistakes, grammatical errors, or stilted sentence formation.
Suspicious Links: When a link in an email is hovered over, the actual destination URL may be revealed. Links in phishing mails tend to look innocent but point to malicious sites that steal individual information.


5. Phishing Awareness Training Program
Phishing awareness training programs are designed to inform employees or individuals of phishing threats and how to identify phishing attacks. These programs are usually composed of the following major components:
Training Objectives and Aims: The primary purpose of phishing training is to reduce the likelihood of successful phishing by allowing individuals to identify and report suspicious activity.
Important Points to be Discussed: Training needs to cover the different types of phishing, how to identify phishing attacks, and how to prevent phishing attacks. This needs to include informing individuals about how to identify suspicious emails, links, and calls.
Interactive Training Methods: Interactive methods such as simulated phishing attacks, quizzes, and scenarios can be employed to instruct participants in detecting phishing attempts. These interactive classes provide hands-on experience in detection and response to phishing attacks.
Regular Testing and Refreshers: Regular testing and refreshers reinforce learning and help employees stay vigilant to phishing attacks.

6. Best Practices to Avoid Phishing Attacks
To prevent being a victim of phishing attacks, individuals and companies can follow these best practices:
Verify Suspicious Emails and Links: Always verify the genuineness of emails and links before clicking on them. In case of uncertainty, contact the sender via a recognized contact channel.
Report Phishing Attempts: Reporting phishing attempts helps companies identify and block phishing attempts before proliferation. Most companies have a reporting mechanism for such activities.
Use Two-Factor Authentication (2FA): Enabling 2FA adds an extra layer of security on online accounts. Although the login credential is hacked through an attacker, he/she will still need the second factor to gain access to the account.
Keep Software Up to Date: Ensure that all software, such as antivirus software, web browsers, and operating systems, is updated with the latest security patches. This blocks vulnerabilities that can be exploited by phishing attackers.

7. Conclusion
Phishing attacks remain the most critical risk to individuals and organizations. Phishing awareness training can be imparted to an individual to make them aware of how to spot phishing attempts and take proactive action to avoid being a victim of phishing attacks. Continuous training, testing, and awareness can make a significant contribution to reducing the risk of phishing-based security violations and protecting sensitive data from unintended access.

8. Real-World Examples of Phishing Attacks
Understanding how phishing attacks have played out in real-life scenarios can help individuals recognize the dangers and better prepare for potential threats. Here are a few notable examples:
•	The 2016 John Podesta Email Hack: One of the most infamous phishing incidents occurred during the 2016 U.S. presidential election. John Podesta, the chairman of Hillary Clinton's campaign, fell victim to a spear-phishing email that appeared to be from Google. The email prompted him to change his password, allowing attackers to gain access to his emails. This breach had significant political implications.
•	The 2019 Capital One Data Breach: A hacker exploited a vulnerability that allowed them to access sensitive data from over 100 million Capital One customers. While the attack was a combination of multiple techniques, phishing played a role in providing the initial foothold into the network.
•	Business Email Compromise (BEC): A more recent and growing trend involves attackers impersonating high-ranking executives within a company and sending fraudulent emails requesting wire transfers or sensitive financial information. These scams can cause massive financial losses for businesses.
These real-world examples illustrate how phishing attacks can lead to significant financial, reputational, and data breaches for both individuals and organizations. It is crucial that users remain vigilant and well-trained to spot these types of attacks early.

9. Measuring the Effectiveness of Phishing Awareness Training
To ensure that phishing awareness training is effective, organizations must regularly assess the program’s success. Here are a few key metrics to measure its effectiveness:
•	Phishing Simulation Results: Many organizations conduct simulated phishing attacks to test how well employees can recognize phishing attempts. The number of individuals who fail the simulation can help gauge the level of awareness and indicate areas where more training is needed.
•	Incident Reporting Rates: Another key metric is how often employees report suspicious emails or other phishing attempts. High reporting rates indicate that employees are more aware and proactive in spotting potential threats.
•	User Engagement: The level of engagement in training programs is an important indicator of their effectiveness. Training programs that incorporate interactive elements, such as quizzes and real-world scenarios, are more likely to engage users and have a greater impact.
•	Post-Training Knowledge Assessments: Administering tests or surveys after training sessions can help evaluate what participants have learned and identify any gaps in knowledge.
10. The Role of IT and Security Teams in Phishing Prevention
While phishing awareness training plays a crucial role in reducing the risk of phishing attacks, IT and security teams are essential in implementing a comprehensive defense strategy. Here are some of the key roles IT and security teams play in phishing prevention:
•	Email Filtering and Anti-Phishing Technologies: IT teams should implement robust email filtering systems that automatically flag suspicious emails before they reach the inbox. These systems can use machine learning and pattern recognition to detect phishing attempts based on common traits, such as unusual sender addresses or malicious attachments.
•	Continuous Monitoring and Threat Detection: IT teams should continuously monitor network traffic and endpoints for signs of phishing-related activity. This includes detecting any unusual login attempts or unauthorized access triggered by stolen credentials.
•	Incident Response and Remediation: If a phishing attack is successful, IT and security teams need to have a clear incident response plan in place. This includes isolating affected systems, analyzing the breach, and notifying relevant stakeholders.
•	Collaboration with Employees: IT teams should regularly collaborate with employees to keep them informed about the latest phishing techniques and best practices for avoiding attacks. This collaboration helps ensure that employees remain vigilant and informed about new threats.

11. Conclusion
Phishing awareness training is one of the most important steps an organization can take to protect itself from the ever-growing threat of phishing attacks. By educating individuals on how to recognize phishing attempts, the types of phishing attacks, and how to respond to suspicious activities, organizations can significantly reduce the risk of successful attacks.
However, phishing prevention is not just the responsibility of individuals. IT and security teams play a vital role in developing and enforcing policies, implementing security technologies, and responding to incidents. A holistic approach, combining training with technology and a strong security culture, is essential in safeguarding against phishing threats.
To remain secure, organizations must continue to invest in phishing awareness programs, regularly assess their effectiveness, and adapt to the evolving tactics of cybercriminals.
12. References
•	The 2016 John Podesta Email Hack. (https://www.wired.com)
•	Capital One Data Breach (2019). (https://www.cnbc.com)
•	Business Email Compromise (BEC) Attacks. (https://www.fbi.gov)

